Swipe to remove is a common pattern in app development,
we haven't used it such far,
so now it's definitely time to implement it.
I want to make sure that in our cart item here, the cart items which we are rendering can be removed
when we swipe them, removed from the lists, removed from the cart.
Now in my app here and that's of course always also something you can define however you want, swiping
means the entire item is gone,
so if we had it in the cart three times, it's now removed entirely.
I won't add a functionality to remove single items,
obviously you could do this as a bonus task but for the purposes of this course and demo, I'll focus
on removing the entire element here.
So how can we implement this?
Thankfully, Flutter got us covered.
There is a special widget which we can add, which we can wrap around our cart here actually and that
is the dismissible widget. That's a widget which is built into Flutter which automatically gives us a nice
animation and will remove the element it wraps from the UI. Internally,
this is a stateful widget therefore and as you can imagine, it does a lot of complex heavy lifting
for managing the animation and so on and therefore, this needs a key to work correctly to avoid issues
where it then displays the list of which often, this part is rendered incorrectly.
Here you should render or use a value key and the perfect value for this is of course the ID of our
cart item because that's guaranteed to be unique. Now on dismissible,
you can also define a background which is shown behind that element
once you start swiping and here, I'll render a container with a color where I use my theme error color
which is a red color. With that added, if you go back and you add an item to the cart, you see I can now
swipe this, right in both directions and if I swipe enough, this indeed is gone. Now
it's not really deleted, it's just deleted on the user interface for now which is why it's back when
I go back
but we can listen of course to that
it's gone effect and then also update it in our data to remove it from there as well.
So we added dismissible,
now there are a couple of things you can configure there.
For one, it would be nice to understand what it does when we remove that.
So here in that container,
I'll also add a little child and that will be an icon and there,
I want to use the delete icon and give that a color of colors
white, also give it a size of 40, so that we can see that. And to position it correctly in the container,
I will add alignment, the alignment argument to the container and set this to alignment.centerRight,
to align it in the center vertically but on the right horizontally. Also add some padding to the container
with EdgeInsets.only on the right of 20 and with that, let's see how that works. If I save this and I
add two items to the cart here,
now you see we have that trash icon here which kind of indicates what's about to happen when we continue
swiping here.
Now if you want to make sure that the background is only behind the cart, you can of course also add the
same margin you added on the overall cart here. Now
that means I just copy that EdgeInsets setup from down there on the cart
and now if I add two cart items there, the swipe effect is only behind the cart. So that's nice, would
also be nice to only swipe from right to left
let's say, not in the other direction.
Thankfully you can restrict this as well
on dismissible.
So here on dismissible, outside of the background argument, so here, you can set the direction argument
to set the direction in which this can be dismissed
and there, you can provide a DismissDirection.
and now here we need endToStart, which typically is right to left and if you set this and you add an item to
the cart, you see now swiping right to left still works but swiping in the other direction does not work.
Now of course, we also need to define what happens once we dismissed it visually because that only affects
the UI but of course we also want to change something in our data then.
And for that, we can define onDismissed which executes a function which we defined here once it's done.
In that function, we received the direction in which it was dismissed,
in case you're allowing different directions and you want to do something different based on the different
directions,
it's not the case for us here,
we always want to dismiss, remove the cart item but if you have different options, different swiping directions,
then you could check the direction here
based on the direction you are getting here as an argument automatically
but since we only have one direction, we can go right ahead and remove the item from our cart. For that
in the cart provider,
we first of all need to add a new method, remove item and the easiest way of getting rid of an item here
is to simply receive the ID of the product it belongs to. So here, we expect our product
ID and that is useful because we use that product ID as a key in our map
if you remember, that's what we assign as a key in the map.
And thankfully, on maps, we also have a remove method to which we pass a key and then the value for that
key will be removed. Thereafter, we call notifyListeners and we're done,
this is the easiest way of getting rid of an entry in a map.
So that's what I want to call here in the cart item
and for that, we need to tap into our cart container, into our provider and hence, we need to import the
provider package in here from provider.dart, from the provider package
and of course, import our cart model here from the providers folder. With that down here, we can setup
provider of cart, pass in the context and then simply call remove item. Now where do we get the product
ID from? We can simply expect it as an input to this cart item widget.
So here, we can expect a product ID argument here, maybe as the second argument, doesn't matter
and now in the place where you render the cart items, so in the cart screen, you also need to pass this as a
second argument
and there you get that from cart items and just as you have a values property to give you a list of
values, you can always get a list of keys and then for that given index we're looking for,
we simply pass in the key as a value to cart item.
So with that, we pass the key for the item we're looking at into our cart item widget and that key is the
product ID.
So we get the product ID here now and with that, we can use the product ID down there.
Now important, I don't really want to set up a listener to the cart here,
so I'll set listen to false, I really just need access to the cart to dispatch my action here, listen
false here on the of method, I don't want to set up a permanent listener.
With that, if we go back to our application and we add a couple of items to the cart, we see them here
and now watch the total up there when I swipe this cart item. You see, the total updated because now
it was really removed from the cart which is also proven by the fact that if I go back and then I
go back into the cart, it's still gone.
So now we're really not just update this visually with the help of dismissible but also in our data with
the help of provider of and our cart provider, our cart container and we're not listening here in the
cart item
but of course we're listening to changes in the cart, in the cart screen and therefore we rebuild the
cart screen when our cart changes
and that's exactly what I want to do because I want to rebuild the total and also my list here.